MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE

5. PRADHAN MANTRI ANNADATA AAY SANRAKSHAN
   ABHIYAN (PM-AASHA) SCHEMES

OBJECTIVE OF PM-AASHA

 Ensure remunerative prices for farmers.
 Control price volatility of essential commodities to benefit consumers.

FINANCIAL DETAILS

 Budgetary Requirement:
   o Total financial outgo for PM-AASHA: 35,000 crore during the 15th Finance Commission cycle (up to 2025-
       26).
   o Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) rates for rabi season (phosphatic and potassic fertilizers) set at a tentative
       budget of 24,475.53 crore.

COMPONENTS OF PM-AASHA

 Converged Schemes:
    Price Support Scheme (PSS)
    Price Stabilisation Fund (PSF)
    Price Deficiency Payment
       Scheme (PDPS)
    Market Intervention Scheme
       (MIS)

CONSUMER PROTECTION
MEASURES

 Extension of PSF:
    Aims to protect consumers
       from extreme price volatility of
       agri-horticultural commodities.
    Involves maintaining a strategic
       buffer stock of pulses and
       onions for calibrated release.
    Discourages hoarding and
       speculation.
    Ensures affordable supply to
       consumers.

FERTILIZER SUBSIDY

 Subsidy Assurance:
    Ensures availability of fertilizers to farmers at subsidized, affordable prices.
    Rationalization of subsidy on P and K fertilizers based on recent trends in international prices.

6. NAMO DRONE DIDI SCHEME

 Namo Drone Didi is a central sector scheme to empower women-led Self-Help Groups (SHGs) by equipping
   them with drone technology to provide agricultural services.

 Aim: To provide drones to 15000 selected Women SHGs during the period from 2024-25 to 2025-2026, for
   providing rental services to farmers for agriculture purposes (application of liquid fertilisers and pesticides at
   present).

RAU'S IAS PRELIMS COMPASS 2025 | GOVERNMENT SCHEMES  8
                                                                                    MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE

KEY FEATURES OF NAMO DRONE DIDI SCHEME

 Financial Support and Accessibility
    Women SHGs receive substantial financial assistance, covering 80% of the drone and accessory costs, up to
       Rs. 8 lakhs.
    For the remaining 20% cost, SHGs can seek loans from the National Agriculture Infrastructure Financing
       Facility (AIF) with a 3% interest subvention.

 Collaborative Effort: The scheme is a collaborative venture between:
    Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
    Department of Rural Development
    Department of Fertilisers
    Lead Fertiliser Companies and other supporting entities.

 Cluster-Based Implementation:
    Scheme implementation involves selection of area/cluster and SHG groups in Rural Areas under DAY ­ NRLM
       (Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana -National Rural Livelihoods Mission), where there is demand for drones to
       provide agriculture services.

 Specialised Training for Women SHG Members: One of the members of the women SHGs will be selected
   for15-day training consisting of:
    5-day mandatory drone pilot training.
    10 days training for agriculture purposes for nutrient and pesticide application.

7. PRIME MINISTER DHAN-DHAANYA KRISHI YOJANA

 Launch Date: February 2025
 It will be launched in partnership with states through the convergence of existing schemes and specialized

   measures
 No separate allocation has been made for the Prime Minister Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana, however, there are

   allocations for existing schemes which are to be converged
    Rs 1,000 crore has been allocated for the mission for pulses
    Rs 500 crore for the mission for vegetables and fruits
    Rs 100 crore support for the Makhana Board
    Rs 100 crore for the mission on hybrid seeds
    Rs 500 crore for the cotton technology mission.
 It will be launched in 100 districts with low crop productivity, moderate crop intensity and below-average credit
   parameters, benefiting 1.7 crore farmers spread across the targeted districts.

RAU'S IAS PRELIMS COMPASS 2025 | GOVERNMENT SCHEMES  9
                                                                                     MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE

 Key focus of the schemes would be:
    To enhance agricultural productivity
    Adopt crop diversification and sustainable
       agriculture practices
    Augment post-harvest storage at the panchayat
       and block level
    Improve irrigation facilities
    Facilitate availability of long-term and short-term
       credit.

COMPONENTS

 Building Rural Prosperity and Resilience
    It aims at addressing under-employment in
       agriculture through skilling, investment,
       technology, and invigorating the rural economy.
    The goal is to generate ample opportunities in
       rural areas so that migration is an option, but not
       a necessity.
    The programme will focus on rural women, young farmers, rural youth, marginal and small farmers, and
       landless families.

 Aatmanirbharta in Pulses
    The government will launch a 6-year mission with a special focus on Tur, Urad and Masoor.
    The Mission will place emphasis on development and commercial availability of climate resilient seeds;
       enhancing protein content; increasing productivity; improving post-harvest storage and management and
       assuring remunerative prices to the farmers.
    Central agencies (NAFED and NCCF) will procure these 3 pulses, as much as offered during the next 4 years
       from farmers who register with these agencies and enter into agreements.

 Comprehensive Programme for Vegetables & Fruits
    A comprehensive programme to promote production, efficient supplies, processing, and remunerative prices
       for farmers will be launched in partnership with states.
    Appropriate institutional mechanisms for implementation and participation of farmer producer
       organizations and cooperatives will be set up.

 Grameen Credit Score: Public Sector Banks will develop the `Grameen Credit Score' framework to serve the
   credit needs of SHG members and people in rural areas.

8. PRADHAN MANTRI KISAN MAANDHAN YOJANA (PM-KMY)

 Launched in 2019 aims at providing social security to all land-holding Small and Marginal Farmers (SMFs) across
   the country.

 This old-age pension scheme is a voluntary and contributory pension scheme.
 Small and marginal farmers aged between 18 and 40 years need to contribute between Rs. 55 to Rs. 200 per

   month until they turn 60 (based on the farmer's age at the time of entry into the Scheme).
 The Central Government, also contributes an equal amount as contributed by the eligible subscriber, to the

   pension Fund
 Once they reach the age of 60, enrolled farmers receive a monthly pension of Rs. 3,000.

RAU'S IAS PRELIMS COMPASS 2025 | GOVERNMENT SCHEMES  10
